INDEPENDENT REGULATORS’ GROUP
Statutes
CHAPTER I

NAME, REGISTERED OFFICE, DURATION

Article 1 – Name
A not-for-profit association is constituted under the name “Independent Regulators’
Group”, or “IRG”.
Article 2 – Registered office
The registered office of the IRG is established at Twin Gardens Building, Rue des
Deux Eglises 26, B-1000 Bruxelles, Belgium, in the Region of Brussels-Capital
(“Région de Bruxelles-Capitale”), in the judicial district of Brussels (“arrondissement
judiciaire de Bruxelles”).
Article 3 – Duration
The duration of the IRG is indefinite.

CHAPTER II

OBJECTIVES

Article 4 – Objectives
The objectives of the IRG are to promote:
a.

By the utilisation and management of the common resources, cooperation,
mutual assistance and information exchanges between its members (hereafter,
the “Members”)

b.

the consistent implementation and application by its Members of the European
Regulatory Framework for electronic communications networks and services

c.

the development of regulatory best practice in the electronic communications
sector in Europe

d.

sustainable and effective competition in the provision of electronic
communications networks and services in Europe

e.

the development of the European internal market in electronic
communications

f.

the interests of the citizens of its Member countries

Article 5 – Fulfilment of objectives
1. In order to fulfil its objectives, the IRG shall:
a.

provide a forum for discussion and the exchange of ideas and expertise
between its Members and with other experts regarding regulatory issues in the
electronic communications sector.

b.

Promote the consistent application of the European Regulatory Framework for
electronic communications networks and services in all member states, and
the development and consolidation of the internal market for electronic
communications networks and services in Europe.

c.

commission, prepare and publish documents, reports, presentations, analyses,
Principles of Implementation and Best Practice (“PIBs”) and other studies to
inform the market regarding regulatory strategies and developments.

d.

monitor the application by its Members of common positions and PIBs, in
order to promote transparency and to ensure the effectiveness of guidance and
the continual development of regulatory best practice.

e.

develop, prepare and/or contribute to documents, reports, presentations,
analyses and other studies , including common positions.

f.

cooperate with other regulatory networks internationally.

g.

maintain an open dialogue between its Members, acting collectively, and
stakeholders, including market participants and consumers.

The Rules of Procedure referred to in Article 10 below (hereafter the “RoP”) may
stipulate detailed provisions regarding the implementation of the objectives defined
herein.
2. IRG may also undertake any other act or activity in furtherance of its objectives,
provided such act or activity complies with the Belgian Law of June 27, 1921
concerning not-for-profit associations, international not-for-profit associations and
foundations, as amended by the Law of May 2, 2002. This may include, but is not
limited to, the recruitment of personnel, rental or leasing of property, the production,
transfer or exchange of property, entering into contracts, including credit agreements,
or granting mortgages, charges or any other guarantee over its assets.

2

CHAPTER III

MEMBERSHIP

Article 6 – Founding Members
The founding Members of the IRG are1:
Agencija za pošto in elektronske komunikacije RS (APEK), Stegne 7, SI-1001 LJUBLJANA, Slovenia
АГЕНЦИЈА ЗА ЕЛЕКТРОНСКИ КОМУНИКАЦИИ (AEK), 13, Dimitrie Čupovski Street,

1000 Skopje,
Amt für Kommunikation (AK), Kirchstrasse 10, Postfach 684, 9490 VADUZ, Liechtenstein
Autoridade Nacional de Comunicações (ANACOM), Avenida José Malhoa, 12, 1099-017 LISBON,
Portugal
Autorità per le garanzie nelle comunicazioni (Agcom), Centro Direzionale Is. B5 Torre Francesco,
80143 NAPOLI, Italy
Bundesnetzagentur für Elektrizität, Gas, Telekommunikation, Post und Eisenbahnen (BNETZA),
Tulpenfeld 4, 53113 BONN, Germany
Comisión del Mercado de las Telecomunicaciones (CMT), Carrer de la Marina 16-18, 08005
BARCELONA, Spain
Commission fédérale de la communication (COMCOM), Marktgasse 9, 3003 Berne, Switzerland
Commission for Communications Regulation (ComReg), Block DEF – Abbey Court - Irish Life Centre,
Lower Abbey Street, DUBLIN 1, Ireland
Комисията за регулиране на съобщенията (KPC), 6 Gurko str, 1000 SOFIA, Bulgaria
Hrvatska agencija za telekomunikacije (HAT), Jurišićeva 13, 10002 Zagreb, Croatia, a non-profit and
independent legal person with public authorities
Institut Belge des services Postaux et de Télécommunications (IBPT / BIPT), Ellipse Building Gebouw C Koning Albert II-laan 35 B-1030 BRUXELLES, Belgium
Institut Luxembourgeois de Régulation (ILR), 45, allée Scheffer, 2922 Luxembourg
Malta Communications Authority (MCA), Valletta Waterfront, Pinto Wharf, VALLETTA, FRN1913,
Malta
Nemzeti Hírközlési Hatóság (NHH), Ostrom u. 23-25, BUDAPEST, 1015 Hungary
Autoritatea Naţională pentru Reglementare în Comunicaţii şi Tehnologia Informaţiei (ANRCTI),
Bdul. Libertatii 14, Sector 5, Cod 050706, BUCHAREST, Romania
Εθνική Επιτροπή Τηλεπικοινωνιών και Ταχυδρομείων (EETT), 60 Kifissias Avenue, 151 25
MAROUSSI, ATHENS, Greece

1

To be finalised on the basis of the final list of founding members.

3

Office of Communications (Ofcom), Riverside House, 2a Southwark Bridge Road, LONDON, SE1 9HA,
United Kingdom, a public corporation
Γραφείο Επιτρόπου Ρυθμίσεως Ηλεκτρονικών Eπικοινωνιών και Ταχυδρομείων (ΓΕΡHEΤ),
Helioupoleos 12, 1101 NICOSIA, Cyprus
Post- och Telestyrelsen (PTS), Birger Jarlsgatan 16, S-102 49 STOCKHOLM, Sweden
Póst- og fjarskiptastofnun (PTA), Suðurlandsbraut 4 2.h, 108 REYKJAVIK, Iceland
Post- og teletilsynet (PT), Nygård 1, 4791 LILLESAND, Norway
Rundfunk und Telekom Regulierungs-GmbH (RTR), Mariahilfer Strasse 77-79, A-1060 WIEN,
Austria, a limited liability company responsible for administrative duties
Lietuvos Respublikos ryšių reguliavimo tarnyba (RRT), Algirdo 27, 03219 VILNIUS, Lithuania
Sabiedrisko pakalpojumu regulesanas komisija (SPRK), Brivibas iela 55, 1010 RIGA, Latvia
Sideamet, Estonian National Communications Board , Ädala 2, 10614 TALLINN, Estonia,
Telekomunikacný úrad Slovenskej republiky (TO SR), Továrenská 7, P.O. Box 18, 810 06
BRATISLAVA 16, Slovak Republic
Telekomünikasyon Kurumu (TK), Yeşilırmak Sokak No.16 Demirtepe, 06430 ANKARA, Turkey
IT- og Telestyrelsen/National IT and Telecom Agency (NITA), Holsteinsgade 63, 2100
COPENHAGEN, Denmark
Prezes Urzędu Komunikacji Elektronicznej (UKE), 18/20 Kasprzaka Street, 01-211 WARSAW, Poland
Viestintävirasto Kommunikationsverket (FICORA), Itämerenkatu 3A, 00180 HELSINKI, Finland

All Members have the legal status of a central governmental administrative body, unless
indicated otherwise.
Article 7 – Admission, resignation and exclusion of Members
1. Admission of new Members
Membership is open to any national regulatory authority (hereafter “NRA”) (but not
more than one from any country) in the electronic communications sector which:
a. regulates its national electronic communications market and, in the case of
EU members, is the national regulatory authority notified to the European
Commission under the Framework Directive, and
b. is independent of its government and operators, and
c. is in a country which is an EU Member State, an EFTA state, an EU
acceding country or a candidate for membership of the EU, which has (or

4

is working towards) a liberalised electronic communications market
(according to EU standards).
Any NRA which fulfils these conditions may request admission by written
notification to the Board of Directors of the IRG, which will submit the request to the
next meeting of the IRG General Assembly. Alternatively, payment of a Membership
Contribution as defined in Article 25 below by an NRA which fulfils the above
conditions will constitute a Membership, unless the General Assembly decides
otherwise.
2. Resignation of Members
a. A Member may resign its membership at any time by sending a notification to
that effect by recorded delivery to the Chairperson at the Secretariat’s
premises before 30 September of each year. The resignation will take effect
on 1 January of the year following the notification.
b. The resigning Member shall remain liable for any outstanding amounts of its
Contribution, but shall not be liable for outstanding contributions of other
Members or any other financial liabilities in accordance with Article 25(4).
Once a Member’s resignation is effective, it shall have no rights to the
corporate assets of the IRG.
3.Exclusion of Members
a. The Board of Directors may propose the exclusion of a Member for the
following reasons:
i. failing to fulfil its obligations hereunder;
ii. being in arrears with its membership dues for a period of over 12
months; or
iii. ceasing to fulfil any of the criteria listed in Article 7(1) above.
b. A proposal for the exclusion of a Member shall be adopted by a decision of
the General Assembly taken with a majority of two thirds of the votes of all
Members, and shall take effect immediately following the General
Assembly’s decision.
c. When the exclusion of a Member has been proposed, that Member shall be
entitled to present a defence prior to the vote by the General Assembly.
d. The Board of Directors may suspend a Member pending a decision by the
General Assembly to exclude that Member.
e. An excluded Member shall remain liable for any outstanding dues, and shall
have no rights to the corporate assets of the IRG.

5

4.Registration
All decisions to admit or exclude Members and accession by means of payment of
Membership Contribution must be registered in the Members’ registry within eight
days of the decision in question. The Statutes and the Members’ registry shall be kept
at the registered office of the IRG.
Article 8 – Size of Membership
The number of Members is unlimited, but may not be less than three.

CHAPTER IV

GENERAL ASSEMBLY

Article 9 – Composition
1. The General Assembly is composed of all Members.
2. The General Assembly may invite external experts and observers to attend its
meetings, following a decision to that effect reached by consensus between the
Members. Observers and external experts may participate in the discussions but
shall not have the right to vote.
3. Members attending the meetings of the General Assembly are represented by their
respective heads or representatives of their heads.
Article 10 – Powers and duties
The General Assembly is the forum for discussion and monitoring of the IRG’s
activities. It shall:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.

take all decisions aimed at pursuing IRG’s objectives;
approve all official documents ;
admit new Members and exclude Members ;
approve the budget ;
approve the annual accounts ;
approve any amendments to the Statutes ;
adopt appropriate financial rules ;
adopt and amend its own Rules of Procedure (hereafter, the “RoP”);
set up working groups/project teams;
appoint and remove members of the Board of Directors, the member(s) of
the Secretariat and the Auditing Committee ; and
k. decide on the dissolution of the IRG, including decisions on the
distribution of existing assets and liabilities of the IRG.

6

Article 11 – Convocations to Meetings
1. Meetings of the General Assembly shall be convened by the Board of Directors in
writing, no less than eight working days prior to the proposed meeting date.
2. The General Assembly shall hold four ordinary General Assembly meetings each
year, and may hold extraordinary meetings.
3. Extraordinary meetings may be convened
a. by the Board of Directors after consultation with the Members, or
b. by, and at the request of at least two Members, when endorsed in writing
by at least one fifth (20%) of the Members.
4. The convocations shall indicate the date, time and place of the meeting and shall
contain the agenda. The agenda may only be modified at the meeting by the
General Assembly if all Members (i) are present or represented, or (ii) agree to
the modified agenda.

CHAPTER V

BOARD OF DIRECTORS

Article 12 – Chairperson, Vice-Chairpersons, additional Board members:
appointment, term
1. The Board of Directors shall be composed of a minimum of three members and a
maximum of five, two of whom shall be the Vice-Chairpersons of the IRG and
one of which shall be the Chairperson of the IRG.
2. The Chairperson shall have a term of one year. Before serving his term as
Chairperson, he shall first serve one year as Vice-Chairperson. He shall also serve
as Vice-Chairperson for the year following his term as Chairperson.
3. Every year the General Assembly shall appoint the Chairperson for the year
subsequent to the following year from among its Members by means of a secret
vote, according to the following selection procedure:
(i).

The serving Chairperson shall propose a candidate.

(ii). The election shall take place no later than one year prior to the
commencement date of the prospective Chairperson taking up his post as a
Chairperson.
(iii). The General Assembly shall vote on the candidate proposed by the serving
Chairperson. The candidate shall be elected if supported by consensus of
the General Assembly.

7

(iv). If no consensus is reached by the General Assembly on the election of the
candidate proposed by the Chairperson, the Board of Directors shall give
Members no less than one month’s notice of the deadline for submitting a
candidacy. A candidacy must be supported by at least 5 Members (i.e., the
proposing Member and 4 other Members).
(v). Candidacies shall be submitted to the Board of Directors, who will
circulate the list of candidacies to the Members as soon as possible
following the deadline.
(vi). Candidates for Chairperson (whether proposed by the Chairperson or any
Members) must be the head (meaning chairperson, board member,
president, vice-president, director or any other similar senior executive) of
an NRA designated by the NRA, in an EU Member State (meaning an
NRA notified as such to the European Commission under the Framework
Directive). A candidate shall have a record of active personal participation
in the IRG and shall ensure that he/she is able to devote a significant part
of his/her time to his/her position in the IRG. Candidates shall present
their motivation, a demonstration of their strong commitment to the values
and objectives of the IRG and their vision of the manner in which they
intend to represent and fulfil the IRG’s agenda.
(vii). Following the delegation procedure described in paragraph (iv) to (vi)
above, the General Assembly shall elect the future Chairperson from the
candidates nominated.
(viii).If the Board of Directors only receives one candidacy, this candidate shall
considered to have been elected.
(ix). If two or more candidacies are submitted, the Chairperson shall be elected
by the General Assembly by means of a secret vote, pursuant to the
following procedure:
1. If, during the first ballot, no candidate obtains a simple
majority of the votes of the Members, the candidate with
the least support shall be withdrawn from the selection
process.
2. The voting procedure in paragraph (2) above shall be
repeated until a candidate wins the support of the a simple
majority of all Members.
(x). The serving Chairperson shall inform the General Assembly of the voting
results.

8

4. The Vice-Chairpersons shall hold office for a period of one year.
5. The Chairperson and Vice-Chairpersons shall be automatically appointed as
members of the Board of Directors. One or two additional member(s) of the
Board may be appointed according to the following procedure:
(i). The serving Chairperson shall determine whether up to two
additional members of the Board of Directors shall be appointed,
and for each such available position on the Board of Directors shall
propose a candidate.
(ii). The election shall take place during the last meeting of the General
Assembly in the year immediately preceding the year in which the
additional member(s) of the Board of Directors are due to take up
their post.
(iii). The General Assembly shall vote on the candidate(s) proposed
by the Chairperson. The candidate(s) shall be elected if supported
by a consensus of the General Assembly.
(iv).
If no consensus is reached by the General Assembly on the
election of the candidate proposed by the Chairperson, the Board
of Directors shall give Members no less than one month’s notice of
the deadline for submitting candidacies for the additional positions
available on the Board of Directors. A candidate must be supported
by at least three Members (i.e., the nominating Member and two
other Members).
(v). Candidacies shall be submitted to the Board of Directors, which
will circulate the list of candidates to the Members as soon as
possible following the deadline.
(vi). A candidate (whether proposed by the Chairperson or any
Members) must be the head (meaning chairperson, board member,
president, vice-president, director or any other similar senior
executive) of an NRA designated by the NRA.
(vii). Following the delegation procedure described in paragraph (iv)
to (vi) above, the General Assembly shall elect the additional
members of the Board of Directors from among the candidates
nominated.
(viii). If the Board of Directors receives one candidacy only, this
candidate shall be considered as having been elected.

9

(ix). If more candidacies are submitted than there are vacancies on the
Board of Directors, the additional members of the Board of
Directors shall be elected by the General Assembly by means of a
secret vote, according to the following procedure:
1.each Member shall have one vote for each of the positions to
be filled. For avoidance of doubt, if two additional
members of the Board are to be elected, each Member shall
cast one vote for a candidate for the first, and one vote for a
candidate for the second member of the Board.
2.For each available position on the Board of Directors, if during
the first ballot no candidate obtains a simple majority of the
votes of all the Members, the candidate with the least
support shall be withdrawn from the selection process.
3.For each available position on the Board of Directors, the
voting procedure in paragraph (2) above shall be repeated
until a candidate wins the support of the majority of all
Members.
(x). The serving Chairperson shall inform the General Assembly of the
voting results.
6. The additional members of the Board of Directors shall be appointed for a period
of one year.
7. Additional members of the Board of Directors and the Chairperson serving as
such in the year following his term as Chairperson may be reappointed to the
Board of Directors one time, for a further one-year term.
8. The Chairperson, the Vice-Chairpersons and the additional members of the Board
of Directors are appointed in a personal capacity.
9. The General Assembly may vote by simple majority to remove any member of
the Board of Directors before the expiry of his term, following a request by at
least three Members. The General Assembly shall decide when the dismissal shall
take effect.
10. Should a member of the Board of Directors resign due to changes in his/her
capacity to represent a certain Member, that Member shall nominate a
replacement representative, who shall be confirmed as a member of the Board of
Directors by the General Assembly.
11. The Chairperson presides over meetings of the General Assembly and the Board
of Directors. In the event of his absence or incapacity, or by delegation, he shall
empower a Vice-Chairperson to exercise the responsibilities of Chairperson. The

10

Chairperson shall be empowered to delegate specific functions to other members
of the Board of Directors.
Article 13 – Powers and duties
1. The Board of Directors shall:
a. ensure that the IRG performs its activities in accordance with its
objectives;
b. assist the Chairperson in his/her responsibilities as defined in these
Statutes and the RoP, and as required and directed by the Chairperson;
c. supervise the day-to-day management of the IRG by the Secretariat;
d. ensure the external representation of the IRG (handling presentations to
and contacts with the institutions, the press, stakeholders etc);
e. propose the draft annual budget to the General Assembly for approval;
f. monitor legal actions involving the IRG as both plaintiff and defendant;
g. submit the draft annual Work Programme to the General Assembly for
approval; and
h. present a report of its activities at each meeting of the General Assembly.
2. The IRG shall be represented externally and in any official documents by the
Chairperson or any member of the Board of Directors designated by the
Chairperson. The Chairperson and the authorised members of the Board of
Directors may delegate the right to sign on behalf of the IRG in specific matters
related to the daily operations of IRG to any two employees of the IRG, acting
jointly. Such delegation may be revoked at any time by the Chairperson or
delegating members of the Board of Directors.
3. Members of the Board of Directors shall be responsible for specific tasks and
duties related to the operations of the IRG, and for managing specific internal and
external relationships of the IRG, as delegated by the Chairperson and in
accordance with his directions.

11

Article 14 – Meetings
1. Meetings of the Board of Directors shall be convened by the Chairperson.
2. The Board of Directors shall hold at least four meetings each year. Decisions
taken at the meetings shall be recorded in minutes, in accordance with Article 21.
3. Except as otherwise stipulated in the Statutes, decisions of the Board of Directors
shall be taken by consensus of those members present or represented.
4. When there are more than three members of the Board of Directors and a decision
of the Board of Directors is required urgently, the Chairperson may adopt a
decision following a vote with the two Vice-Chairpersons.
5. In this event the Chairperson shall inform the remaining members of the Board of
Directors of the decision as soon as possible.
6. In the event that a meeting of the Board of Directors is not possible or practicable
and a matter is urgent, the Chairperson may seek the agreement of the members of
the Board of Directors by means of an electronic procedure. In such cases the
Chairperson shall set the deadline for comments and shall clearly explain the
consequences of failure to respond by that deadline.

CHAPTER VI

CONTACT NETWORK

Article 15 – Composition
The Contact Network is composed of senior representatives of all Members and is
chaired by a representative of the Chairperson. Its members shall have a mandate to
speak on behalf of their NRA.
Article 16 – Powers and duties
1. The Contact Network may not take decisions which bind the General Assembly.
2. The Contact Network shall make the necessary preparations for each ordinary
meeting of the General Assembly, and may be requested by the Chairperson to
make the necessary preparations for any extraordinary meetings. To this end it
shall:
a. aim to resolve outstanding differences of opinion between the Members,
b. ensure that proposed papers to be submitted for consideration by the
General Assembly are duly and timely prepared, and
c. agree the agenda for each General Assembly to be proposed to the
Members for approval.

12

3. The Contact Network also operates as an informal network whose members are
the key contact points between Members for seeking and exchanging information
on regulatory issues.

CHAPTER VII

SECRETARIAT

Article 17 – Composition
The Secretariat is based in Brussels and is headed by the General Secretary.
Article 18 – Powers and duties
1. The Secretariat works under the direction of the Chairperson and the Board of
Directors. It is accountable to the General Assembly.
2. The Secretariat manages the day-to-day activities of the IRG, providing support to
the Chairperson, the Board of Directors, the Contact Network and the General
Assembly.
3. The Secretariat is responsible for monitoring the performance and fulfilment of
the annual Work Programme.

CHAPTER VIII

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 19 – Voting rights
1. All Members duly present or represented shall be entitled to vote at the General
Assembly. Each Member shall have one vote.
2. A Member’s voting rights shall be suspended if it has defaulted on payment of its
Contributions (as defined in Article 25 below) for more than three months.
Article 20 – Voting rules
1. Quorum
The quorum for meetings of the General Assembly, the Board of Directors and the
Contact Network is two-thirds of their respective members.
2. Proxy
Members who are unable to send a representative to attend a meeting may
nominate another Member to represent them, on the basis of a written proxy

13

signed by an authorised signatory of the nominating Member and addressed to the
Chairperson. A Member may not represent more than one other Member.
3. General rules
a. Voting shall be by a show of hands or by secret ballot.
b. A request for a secret ballot must be made by at least two participants.
c. Abstentions shall not be taken into account in calculating the majority. If the
number of abstentions exceeds one third of the votes, the matter shall be
postponed for decision until the next meeting.
d. The views of any participants who do not support a decision shall be included in
the minutes of the meeting in question.
4. Voting rules of the General Assembly
Unless otherwise specified in the Statutes:
a. decisions of the General Assembly shall normally be reached by
consensus of all Members present or represented.
b. when consensus cannot be reached, there shall be further discussion of the
matter and a repeat of the voting procedure at the same meeting of the
General Assembly. The matter shall then be decided by the greater of (a) a
two-thirds (qualified) majority of the Members present or represented or
(b) a simple majority (50% plus 1) of the votes of all Members.
Decisions on matters defined in paragraphs f. and k. of Article 10 herein require
the consensus of the General Assembly.
5. Voting rules of the Board of Directors
Unless otherwise specified in the Statutes,
a. decisions of the Board of Directors shall be reached by consensus of all its
members present . Each member of the Board of Directors present has one
vote.
b. Members of the Board of Directors may attend meetings of the Board of
Directors by telephone or other audiovisual connection. Any Board
member attending a meeting by these means shall be considered to be
present at that meeting.

14

6. Distance voting
When a meeting of the General Assembly or the Board of Directors is not
possible or feasible and a matter is urgent, the Chairperson may seek the
agreement of the Members or members of the Board of Directors, respectively, on
a decision by electronic procedure. In such cases, the Chairperson shall set the
deadline for comments and shall clearly explain the consequences of failure to
respond by that deadline.
7. Binding decisions
With the exception of those decisions relating to the organisation and funding of
the IRG (in particular those listed in article 10. b) to k), the decisions of the
General Assembly and the Board of Directors shall not be binding on the
Members.
Article 21 – Minutes
Minutes of meetings of the General Assembly, the Board of Directors and the Contact
Network shall be drawn up by the Secretariat.
Minutes of meetings of the General Assembly and Board of Directors shall record the
decisions adopted in accordance with the voting rules set out in Article 20 of the Statutes.
The minutes of meetings of the General Assembly and the Board of Directors shall be
approved electronically by the participants at the meeting in question.
The approved minutes of the General Assembly shall be made available to the Members
within ten working days after the meeting in question.
The minutes of all meetings of the General Assembly and of the Board of Directors shall
be kept by the Secretariat in a register. The minutes of the General Assembly shall be
accessible to any Member on request.
Article 22 – Rules of Procedure
Except as otherwise provided by these Statutes, the detailed rules governing the
execution of the functions of the General Assembly, the Board of Directors, the Contact
Network and the Secretariat shall be set out in the RoP.
Article 23 – Language
The working language of the IRG shall be English. However, for as long as the IRG is an
association sans but lucratif (ASBL) under Belgian law, all documents which Belgian law
requires to be drafted in an official language of Belgium shall be drafted in French.
15

CHAPTER IX

FINANCES

Article 24 – Budget
1. The Board of Directors shall propose a draft budget for approval by the General
Assembly to be held no later than the end of November of the year preceding the
budget year.
2. If the General Assembly fails to approve the budget before the start of the
financial year to which it relates, then until the General Assembly has approved
that budget and corresponding Contributions for that financial year, the Board of
Directors may require Members to make part-payments equivalent to their
Contributions for the previous financial year, pro rata temporis. In this case, the
final budget approved by the General Assembly shall take into consideration the
part-payments already made in the same financial year.
Article 25 – Membership Contributions
1.

All Members shall contribute to the budget of the IRG by paying a membership
contribution (hereafter, the “Contribution”) whose amount shall be decided by
consensus by the General Assembly.
In the event that the aggregate amount of the Contributions would not cover the
proposed draft budget, the General Assembly may by consensus, approve the
payment of additional Contributions, on the basis of the proposal on the draft
annual budget prepared by the Chairperson. In this event, the draft budget shall
include the proposed amount of additional Contributions to be paid by the
Members. The amount, method of calculation and payment details of the
additional Contributions shall be governed by the internal rules on additional
Contributions to be prepared and approved by the Board of Directors, taking into
consideration the principles of solidarity and proportionality, the voluntary
contributions offered by Members, and the ability of Members to contribute to the
budget, based on objective criteria.

2. Contributions are due by 31 December of the year preceding the financial year in
question. Amounts due and not paid by this date may be subject to accrued
interest calculated from the due date. The interest rate is determined by the Board
of Directors.
3. Under no circumstances may the amount of the Contribution which any Member
may be required to pay for any one year exceed € 20,000.
4. Except if and insofar as is specifically required by mandatory provisions of
Belgian law, Members shall not assume any personal commitments regarding the
obligations assumed by the IRG, and under no circumstances are they liable for
the liabilities of the IRG or any of its Members.

16

Article 26 – Accounting
1. The accounting year begins on 1 January and ends on 31 December of the same
year, with the exception of the first accounting year, which begins on the date on
which the registration of the IRG as an association sans but lucratif is valid under
Belgian law, and ends on 31 December of that year.
2. The Board of Directors shall submit the IRG’s annual accounts, prepared in
accordance with Belgian law, for the approval of the General Assembly no later
than six months following the end of the financial year in question.
3. Within thirty days of their approval by the General Assembly, the annual accounts
shall be filed by the Chairperson as required by Belgian law.
4. If required by law, the General Assembly shall appoint a statutory auditor.
Article 27 – Dissolution
The General Assembly shall determine the method of dissolution and liquidation of the
IRG.
In the event of the dissolution of the IRG, its net assets shall, by a decision of the General
Assembly, either be transferred to an institution having aims similar to those of the IRG,
or assigned to not-for-profit uses considered to be in accordance with the purposes of the
IRG. Such transfer or assignment must be made to a person or entity with a not-for-profit
purpose.

17

