                                      Climate Action Network
                  CAN Charter
   Our Network Rules and Governance Principles
                     Amended Version as approved by
                  the CAN International General Assembly
                                March 2021

                                             INTRODUCTION

This document aims to provide clarity and set rules for the way the CAN global network is organized and
works. It should be used as a guide to define how members, Nodes and CAN International best work
together with the ultimate aim to bring the change we need.

                                 A. DESCRIPTION, VISION AND MISSION

1. CAN is a global network of non-government not for profit member organizations from all over the
world committed to combating harmful climate change and advancing climate justice and equity. This
network is based on trust, transparency, democracy, and inclusiveness and should hold itself
accountable for this.

2. CAN members are primarily engaged through National and Regional Nodes, but also engage, together
with the Nodes at the international level through CAN International. While Nodes are fully responsible
for the actions taking place in their country or region, CAN International ensures coordination at the
international level and facilitates and implements international cooperation between Nodes, members
and its Secretariat. The global CAN network encompasses all activities in the name of CAN, by National
Nodes, Regional Nodes and by CAN International. CAN International Association E.V. is a legal
organisation established to create a secretariat that coordinates activities of CAN Nodes and their
members at the international level. In terms of governance, each Node should have its own governance
structure that is fully and autonomously accountable for the activities within its Node. This autonomy
does not exclude that in cases (and only in those cases) where certain activities of a given Node are in
breach of the CAN Charter and the CAN Code of Conduct, that the CAN International Board, per its
discretion and when possible in cooperation with the relevant Node(s), may take up the role of dispute
resolution agency and may request the CAN International Secretariat to assess and if feasible resolve the
issue, and/or appoint an arbitrator or set up other relevant avenues to help the Board in resolving the
dispute. In case of failure of mediation, the issue will be brought to the General Assembly for final
decision.

3. CAN is led by the power of its members aimed at creating change, at national and regional level
through its National and Regional Nodes, and at the global level through CAN International. CAN sees
itself as a bottom-up network, that is driven by its members. In support of this, CAN International as well
as the CAN Nodes may establish to support and coordinate the activities of its members.

4. CAN notes that life on earth is under severe threat from catastrophic climate change, which is being
caused by humans through our constant production of greenhouse gases. CAN as a network faces this
threat with the common concern of its members all over the world.

5. The vision of CAN is a world striving actively towards and achieving the protection of the global
climate in a manner which promotes equity and social justice between peoples, sustainable
development of all communities, and protection of the global environment. CAN unites to work towards
this vision.

6. CAN's mission is to support and empower civil society organizations to influence the design and
development of an effective global strategy to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and ensure its
implementation at international, national and local levels in the promotion of equity and sustainable
development.

7. The objectives of CAN are:
        a) To prevent dangerous climate change through awareness and capacity building of
                 governments and citizens worldwide;
        b) To protect the global climate from dangerous human interference;
        c) To be the conscience of the world concerning issues of climate change;
        d) To promote the protection of the global climate from dangerous human interference; and so
                 to facilitate the radical transformation in the way we use resources, the land and energy;
        e) To prioritize sustainable development that meets the needs of the present generation without
                 compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs;
        f) To inspire government, business, community, and individual action to this effect;
        g) To develop an objective understanding of climate change and its causes, and share this
                 information with all people, especially all members;
        h) To organize, support, inspire and coordinate its members to take effective action on climate
                 change, either as one global voice, or in the regions where members operate.

8. The Strategies of CAN include:
        a) Active participation in the international climate change negotiations and all other relevant
                  fora;
        b) Raising awareness and pushing issues onto the global agenda to influence the climate change
                  decision-making process;
        c) Placing new climate change, equity and sustainable development issues on the global agenda;
        d) Contributing to the establishment of global, regional, national and local climate change
                  agendas through mobilizing a genuinely inclusive civil society process at all levels;
        e) Promoting a nuclear free future;
        f) Ensuring the gains at the global level are translated into concrete benefits at the national and
                  local level, and are implemented effectively and work to benefit of poor people and
                  countries;
        g) Facilitating a process for developing campaigns and negotiating strategies at the global level;
        h) Holding global institutions and the private sector accountable for their actions and ensuring
                  they respond to social and environmental concerns;
        i) Developing and disseminating knowledge that is crucial to addressing the trans-national
                  challenges of climate change;
        j) Addressing the participatory gap through the creation of inclusive processes.

9. The Primary activities of CAN are:
        a) Information sharing;
        b) Capacity Building;
        c) Lobbying on common positions;
        d) Coordination of media messages;
        e) Coordination of research efforts;
        f) Cooperation with other NGO groupings;
        g) Mobilization of public support and awareness;
        h) Any other activities which would promote the CAN objectives.

                                            B. CAN MEMBERS

10. All non-profit organizations, including community based organisations, that do not represent
government nor industry interests and which actively promote ambitious climate action and sustainable
development, are eligible to become members of CAN and may apply to do so.

11. By applying for membership the applicant organisation declares that it will respect and apply the
rules of this Charter, support the vision, mission and activities of CAN, and bind itself to the CAN Code of
Conduct.

12. Applicant organizations must apply for membership with the relevant National or Regional Node
where the applicant is active. In case there is no Node covering the applicant's work area, or in case the
applicant's work area covers several different Nodes, the applicant may apply to become a member of
CAN International. In some cases applicant organisations (in particular development NGOs) may work in
multiple countries or regions but have their governance and/or advocacy activities mainly based in one
country or region. In those cases the applicant should apply with the relevant National or Regional Nodes
as determined by their governance. Nodes (including CAN International), when rejecting an application
on this basis, will refer the applicant to the correct Node.

13. Organisations with offices that are active in multiple Nodes are strongly encouraged to apply and
engage both with CAN International for their coordinating office and with all the national and regional
nodes their offices are active in.

14. All Nodes as well as CAN International have their own procedures for accepting, suspending,
expelling and resigning of members. These procedures, while different, should all guarantee principles of
trust, inclusiveness and transparency, need to be fully in line with all the principle of this Charter, and
should be available on the respective Nodes' and/or CAN International's website. For Nodes where such
processes are not available, the CAN International rules should be followed.

15. All Nodes may establish specific membership categories, including the categories for observer
members.

16. By becoming a member of a CAN National or Regional Node, whatever the category of membership,
the organisation will not only have access to the relevant membership services and engagement
opportunities of this specific Node but also to those offered by CAN International. Nodes will regularly
inform both new and existing members of the services and engagement opportunities offered by CAN
International. Similarly, members of National Nodes should have access to the membership services and
engagement opportunities of the Regional Node the National Node is member of. Nodes can also decide
to provide access to a number of their membership services to members of other Nodes and/or CAN
International, if they wish to do so, and depending on their own provisions. All Nodes are free to decide
this independently.

17. In case an application is refused by a National or Regional Node, or by CAN International, and
irrespective of any appeal procedures that may be offered by the relevant Node, the applicant may apply
with a different Node or with CAN International, guided by paragraph 11 above, but must include in its
application the reasons why it is submitting a new application and why its previous application was
rejected.

                                   C. NATIONAL AND REGIONAL NODES

18. A National Node is an association of CAN Members in a particular country. A Regional Node is an
association of CAN Members, and/or CAN National Nodes, in a group of countries on an international
basis. The name of any Node must adequately reflect the country/countries it represents.

19. Nodes are formed to enable members to increase their capacity to reach our common objectives and
bring the change that is needed.
20. Any National or Regional Node will strive to match the minimum requirement for Node status listed
in the "Building Effective CAN Nodes" policy. The CAN International Secretariat will, where possible,
support Nodes in reaching both the minimum requirements as well as the criteria for effective Nodes,
and will provide the CAN International General Assembly an annual update of the Nodes' status in
reaching the different requirements. The ambition is for every Node to be an effective one. The Nodes
are requested to provide all necessary information to the Secretariat well in time for this.

21. All Nodes are expected to subscribe to the provisions of this Charter, the CAN Code of Conduct and
the "Our CAN Values" Statement, and must act on the basis of trust, inclusiveness, transparency and be
accountable for this.

22. Any group of CAN members and/or organisations eligible for CAN membership can propose to
establish a new National or Regional Node. Applications for establishing new Nodes must be addressed
to the CAN International General Assembly and must include an overview of the proposed members of
the Node (at least three), a clear strategy on how the minimum requirements for Nodes will be reached,
and how the Node aims to reach the criteria for effective Nodes. The CAN International General
Assembly will decide on the acceptance of new Nodes, after consulting the relevant CAN members and
Nodes active in the relevant country/region on the acceptance of the new Node.

23. The CAN International General Assembly can suspend or cancel the use of the CAN name and/or logo
by National or Regional Nodes, in case of breaches to the principles of this Charter, the Code of Conduct
of CAN and the minimum requirements for Nodes. Any complaints about such breaches should be first
raised within the Node. If no resolution can be found the CAN International Secretariat should be
informed which then raises the issue with the CAN International Board. If no resolution can be found, the
issue will be brought to the General Assembly.

24. In principle, any new Regional Node must include all existing National and Regional Nodes based in
its territory. And any new National Node must become a member of the existing Regional Node covering
its territory.

25. Once accepted the Node may carry out activities under the name of CAN. The CAN International
Secretariat keeps a list of all accepted Nodes which should be available on its website.

26. The CAN International General Assembly keeps track of the demarcation of the different Nodes,
identifies the countries or regions that are not covered by CAN Nodes, and together with the CAN
International Secretariat develops a strategy on what to do with the countries and regions not covered.
Similarly, the CAN International General Assembly may adopt a vision and strategy on how to further
develop the Nodes, which may include, while respecting Nodes' autonomy, a vision on the potential
needs to merge or split Nodes, and/or establish new Nodes.

27. The CAN International General Assembly must consider whether any application to establish a new
Node impacts the agreed demarcation of the geographical extent of existing Nodes, and in the case of
such an impact agreement must be sought first with the existing Nodes before the proposal can be
considered.

28. A National or Regional Node will strive to create its own legal entity, raise its own funds, and conduct
the activities it determines for the purposes of furthering the CAN vision, mission and activities in their
country or region. All National and Regional Nodes shall have a proper governing body based on
principles of inclusiveness, transparency and accountability.

29. National and Regional Nodes are free to set up their own rules and codes of conduct but such rules
should not be in conflict with the provisions of this Charter, the CAN Code of Conduct and the "Our CAN
Values" Statement.

30. Each National or Regional Node governing body is accountable to its members. In the event of a
failure of this accountability, the members may report this to the CAN International Board, which may
take appropriate action.

31. Each National or Regional Node must appoint a Coordinator or co-coordinators, recognizing that
Nodes may designate different titles to these roles, taking into consideration geographic and gender
equity.

32. The National or Regional Node may set the rules for the appointment, rotation, terms of reference,
and activities of the Node Coordinator.

33. The National or Regional Node may also decide to appoint a Node focal point for its relationship with
CAN International which can be the same or a different person than the Node Coordinator.

34. National and Regional Nodes may decide to set up a Node secretariat with its own staff, objectives
and work programme.

35. The CAN International Secretariat will, funding permitted, organise an annual meeting bringing
together representatives of the International Secretariat and the Node focal points. This meeting aims
to:
        – provide a platform for Nodes to discuss cooperation and coordination;
        – support Nodes in their further development;
        – strengthen the cooperation between Nodes and CAN International;
        – initiate, further develop and evaluate joint projects between Nodes and with CAN
                 International.

                                         D. CAN INTERNATIONAL

36. Members of National and Regional Nodes work together in the global CAN network to engage in
global climate politics. These activities are supported by the CAN International Secretariat, which also
supports the functioning and coordination of the National and Regional Nodes. CAN International has its
own legal status, its own governance structure, and its own members which include all of the National
and Regional Nodes of the CAN network.

37. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Charter, the CAN International Board must fulfil the
function of dispute resolution agency within the CAN network, including within the Nodes of
organization within CAN. In the case of a dispute arising and not adequately provided for in this Charter,
the CAN International Board must attempt to resolve the dispute, and CAN members agree to this role
by the International Board. The CAN International Board may appoint one or more of its members to act
as an intervener in disputes, or may appoint an independent third party to do so. All dispute resolution
procedures will be designed by the CAN International Board, and will in all cases include an attempt at
mediation. Arbitration of a dispute may only occur if the parties to the dispute agree to do so and can
agree to an arbitrator, who may be a CAN International Board member. In the case of arbitration, the
decisions of the arbitration will be final and binding. In all other cases where mediation has failed and
arbitration is not agreed to, the matter will be referred to the next CAN International General Assembly
for a final and binding decision.

                                            E. GOVERNANCE

38. CAN is a member-driven democratic network that seeks the largest possible cooperation amongst its
members. The governance of the network is the responsibility of all CAN members. Both CAN
International and all National and Regional Nodes need to ensure they are governed in a transparent,
inclusive and democratic way that allows all members to contribute to the decision-making processes.
This includes ensuring that the General Assembly or any other form of members' meeting of each node
remains the highest decision-making body of the node.

39. The respective General Assemblies of each of the Nodes and of CAN International should,
autonomously, elect and give a mandate to a Board of Directors or a Steering Committee to ensure a
more permanent governance in between General Assembly meetings. The election of the Board of
Directors or Steering Committee shall be inclusive and transparent and their composition should reflect a
balanced representation of genders, regions and interests.

40. The General Assembly of CAN International shall serve as the General Assembly of the CAN Network.
Unless otherwise decided by the General Assembly, the CAN International Board of Directors shall serve
as the Board of Directors of the CAN Network and fulfil the functions assigned to the Board in this
Charter. The relevant provisions governing CAN International General Assembly and the CAN
International Board of Directors with regards to the frequency, invitation, composition, quorum,
mandate, nominations, election, decision-making, and so forth, as contained in the CAN International
Statutes shall apply mutatis mutandis.

                           F. CAN POSITIONS, STATEMENTS AND STRATEGIES

41. A statement refers to a letter or a position statement for open publication. Nodes are free to make
statements of their own. However both Nodes and CAN statements shall be respectful to the work of
other Nodes. In seeking to achieve such goal, cooperation and consultation, among Nodes and CAN, as
relevant, shall be sought for statements that may impact the work of other Nodes and/or CAN in all
international, multilateral, regional, cross-national, and other processes and moment as appropriate. If a
statement is relevant for multiple Nodes, preference should be given to joint or global statements.

42. Each Node has its own rules for deciding on its positions, which should be available to all its
members. For all Nodes, the same principles of striving for consensus, inclusiveness, transparency and
accountability apply.

43. CAN positions and statements should reflect the opinions of all Nodes and members. This also
implies all relevant members and Nodes make an effort to engage in these processes.

44. Statements of members or Nodes should not be in contradiction with CAN positions. Therefore, all
members or Nodes should strive to ensure that their views are reflected in CAN positions on this basis,
and CAN positions should take positions of members and Nodes into account.

45. In the case of a Node releasing a statement which is made in the name of CAN, but which is in
conflict with an already existing position of CAN or another Node of CAN, the CAN International Board
may take the necessary steps to resolve the issues.

46. International CAN positions are developed in a transparent process involving interested CAN
members and Nodes through the relevant structures, and supported by the CAN International
Secretariat.

47. International CAN positions should be adopted by consensus of all Node and CAN International
members, with consensus being reached if only a small minority disagrees. The relevant Working Group
coordinators and the CAN International Secretariat will ensure the assessment of whether dissenting
views form a small minority.

48. Any member of CAN International or of a CAN Node that has duly participated in the position
development process can request to have its disagreement to a CAN position or specific elements of the
position mentioned as a footnote in the position statement. If a CAN Node formally disagrees with a CAN
Statement, then the Statement cannot be adopted.

49. The CAN International secretariat may propose, establish and support working groups, task forces,
coordination groups and other relevant structures. Each of these structures should have clear terms of
references which articulate how members and Nodes can participate and be represented. These
structures must function on the basis of legitimacy, inclusiveness, transparency, trust and accountability.

                                             G. FUNDRAISING

50. All National and Regional Nodes as well as CAN International are encouraged to raise funds to ensure
they can function independently and in line with the needs and expectations of their members.

51. Funds raised by CAN International shall, depending on the conditions of the funder, and the needs of
the CAN International Secretariat to provide the basic services it is expected to provide, be utilized both
to fund the activities of CAN International and of the Nodes that need financial support to ensure CAN is
a truly global network with adequate participation from NGOs from the South.

52. CAN International, Nodes and potentially members are encouraged to engage in funding and/or
(joint) fundraising activities that can support the strengthening of all Nodes and in particular those from
developing countries.

53. Any funding to assist members or Nodes may be distributed on the following conditions:
        a) The allocation of funds is based on clear, transparent and inclusive processes;
        b) The allocation has been approved by the CAN International Board as part of the general
                budget approval;
        c) The member or Node commits to proper regular reporting on the spending of these funds;
        d) the Node meets or is in the process of meeting the minimum requirement for Node status.

54. In the allocation of funds, special consideration will be given to members and Nodes which are short
of funding to enable them to fully participate in the work of the CAN network.

55.The CAN International secretariat will regularly provide the General Assembly with an overview of
funding streams, within or outside of joint projects that it manages, from CAN International to Nodes
and members, as well as from Nodes to Nodes and from Nodes to CAN International. For Node to Node
funding, Nodes will be urged to inform the CAN International Secretariat so that it can provide said
overview.

56. Decisions on the sourcing, administration, and distribution of funds are to be made by the CAN
International Secretariat under the guidance of the CAN International Board, which includes but is not
limited to budget approval.

57. CAN Nodes will be free to raise funds in the name of CAN.

58. Such fundraising activities should, where relevant and possible, be coordinated between all the
relevant Nodes and CAN International, to avoid competition and increase the overall chances of success.
Nodes and CAN International are requested to inform the Node where a funder is hosted of their
intention to make an application, in order to avoid competing demands and potentially sharing
experiences to improve the application.

59. All funds raised under the name of CAN shall, to the extent that funding and resources allow, be
subject to an annual audit based on generally accepted accounting principles.
                         H. VALUES, CODE OF CONDUCT AND ACCOUNTABILITY

60. In accordance with CAN International’s mission, we are committed to mobilize our efforts to
meaningful climate action and climate justice while adhering to the following fundamental values that
underpin the mission and objectives of CAN and its members. We therefore commit ourselves to:
         a) Participatory, accountable and transparent decision-making;
         b) Ensuring that the Network remains true to its vision, mission and objectives, which prioritizes
                  communities, people, and the planet;
         c) Mutual respect, cooperation, collaboration and networking internally and with other
                  organizations around issues of mutual concern;
         d) Reject all forms of racism, sexism and any other form of discriminatory and unjust behaviour.

61. CAN recognizes that all individuals who are contributing to realizing CAN’s vision and mission have a
right that this work takes place in an environment that is free of harassment, sexual harassment, bullying
and other similar harmful behaviour. The General Assembly shall adopt policies to give effect to this
provision and shall review, and if needed revise, these policies periodically. All organs, Nodes, members
of CAN, as well as their representatives, and officers and staff of CAN are responsible for ensuring the
implementation of the policies.

62.CAN has adopted a series of policies forming a "Code of Conduct" for its members, Nodes, as well as a
number of the organs, roles and offices described in this Charter, which shall be made available to
members on the CAN website.

63. As an international network of organizations, we recognize the importance of establishing and
maintaining appropriate and effective bodies that will govern the internal functioning of our Network at
the global, regional, national, and sub-national levels. To this end we will:
        a) Ensure the global CAN Network has a clear vision, mission, objectives and policies, and
                 adheres to them;
        b) Ensure all governance structures reflect the diversity of our network, including but not limited
                 to race, age and gender as well as the various target constituencies of the Network, with
                 regard to both their composition and their geographic spread.

64. Our commitment to promote participatory, accountable and transparent decision making is
enshrined in this code of conduct. Whilst not a binding obligation on members, we aim to:
        a) Develop mechanisms to enable all our members to be involved in planning programs that
                directly affect them;
        b) Provide opportunities for regular evaluations and updating of programs;
        c) Hold General Assemblies with full, open and accurate disclosure of relevant information
                concerning goals, programs, finances and governance of the Network;
        d) Hold regular strategic planning sessions to which all CAN members are invited to contribute;
        e) Provide clear and transparent accounting on financial matters to the broader membership.

65. All Member organisations, Nodes, Staff and Board members of the CAN network are committed to
the CAN "Code of Conduct".

66. All CAN members, Nodes, the Secretariat, Board, and individuals within the CAN Network are subject
to the "Code of Conduct." Serious breaches of the Code include but are not limited to:
         a) Actions taken against the Network, including but not limited to:
                  (i) Misrepresenting the Network and its positions; and
                  (ii) Causing reputational damage to CAN;
         b) Deceptive actions and practices, including but not limited to:
                  (i) Fraud or corruption; and
                  (ii) Financial embezzlement;
         (c) Actions taken in disrespect to other CAN members, Nodes, and other bodies, including but
        not limited to:
                 (i) Publicly and actively undermining CAN positions, decision-making processes, and
                 shared values; and
                 (ii) Failure to fulfil duties to report and be held accountable to the CAN International
                 Board, Secretariat, Nodes or other offices as appropriate;
                 (iii) Failure to make important decisions accessible and transparent to members; and
        d) Actions taken against fellow community members in the Network, including but not limited
        to:
                 (i) Actions reflecting racism, bullying, sexual harassment and harassment, and any other
                 form of discrimination, which CAN takes extremely seriously as consistent with CAN’s
                 relevant policies; and
                 (ii) Actions that are violent in nature, including through communication and any other
                 forms of violence.

67. Breaches by members or Nodes may result in disciplinary action, which may, in the most serious
cases, include the expulsion of members or Nodes from the CAN Network. Nodes should adopt policies
for addressing member discipline, sanctioning and redress for breaches by their members. CAN
International shall similarly adopt a policy for addressing discipline, sanctioning and redress for breaches
by any CAN nodes, CAN International member, or member of a CAN node in a context of work falling
under the purview of CAN International.

                                       CHANGES TO THIS CHARTER

68. This Charter may be amended or terminated by the General Assembly of CAN International.
